Create optimizations-to-make-to-your-docs-for-llms (#59)
Redocly/website: blog/optimizations-to-make-to-your-docs-for-llms.md

The good news? Fixing this isn't as complicated as you might think. It just requires rethinking how you structure and format your documentation with AI consumption in mind.

## Common challenges with API docs and LLMs

AI models don’t read documentation like humans do. They can't look at your beautiful layout, understand visual hierarchy, or fill in context gaps the way a developer can. Instead, they process text in a very specific way that documentarians may not have considered in the past. 

### Poor formatting confuses tokenization

AI models break down text into small pieces called tokens. When your documentation has poorly formatted code examples or inconsistent parameter names, these tokens get fragmented in ways that lose meaning.

Take this common pattern in API docs:

```
Set the api_key parameter to your-key-here when making requests.
```

> Without proper formatting, the AI might split `api_key` into separate pieces, making it harder to understand what you're actually talking about. Your developers ask the AI about authentication, and it gives them a confused answer because it couldn't properly identify the parameter name.

Reviewer: This seems irrelevant.

        Dev->>+AI: "Show me code example"
        AI->>+Good: Retrieve properly formatted code
        Good-->>-AI: Fenced code blocks with language tags
        AI-->>-Dev: Correct, runnable code example
    end
    
    Note over Dev,Good: Developer succeeds quickly
```

The good news? Improving how LLMs consume your docs isn't particularly complex. It just requires a little rethinking about how you structure and format your documentation with AI consumption in mind.

## Common challenges with API docs and LLMs

AI models don't read documentation like humans do. They can't look at your beautiful layout, understand visual hierarchy, or fill in context gaps the way a developer can. Instead, they process text in a very specific way that documentarians may not have considered in the past.

### Mixed topics confuse AI chunking

AI systems organize information into chunks, usually paragraph-sized sections. When you mix different topics in the same section (like putting rate limiting info in your authentication section), the AI can't separate the concepts. So when someone asks about authentication, they get rate limiting details mixed in, making the answer less useful.

> Some tool can help - Redocly, for example, automates the creation of your `llms.txt` file with a lightweight Markdown index that may help AI assistants navigate your docs more intelligently.

Reviewer: I would remove this -- as least doesn't fit within this heading (not related to chunking).

This might feel repetitive, but AI systems get confused when you use different words for the same thing. Pick one term and use it consistently throughout your docs. Modern documentation platforms (like Redocly) offer linting capabilities that can automatically detect and flag terminology inconsistencies, making this easier to maintain at scale.

**Confusing for AI:**

```
Configure the API key, then use your access token to authenticate requests, and include the auth credential in the header.
```

**Clear for AI:**

```
Configure the API key, then use your API key to authenticate requests, and include the API key in the header.
```

Yes, perhaps it reads a bit awkwardly to humans, but AI systems will give much more accurate answers when you're consistent with terminology.

> **Why this matters:** [LLMs struggle with consistency](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2505.00268) and must infer whether different terms are synonyms or distinct concepts. When you use "API key," "access token," and "auth credential" interchangeably, the AI creates probabilistic guesses about their relationships, leading to incorrect responses.

### 3. Format code examples properly

> This is probably the biggest quick win. Inline code without proper formatting gets tokenized unpredictably, leading to broken examples in AI responses.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is probably the biggest quick win.
Inline code without proper formatting can be parsed ambiguously by AI systems, causing commands to get merged or altered when they appear in AI-generated responses.

```

3. Client includes token in Authorization header for subsequent requests
4. Server validates token and processes request
The diagram above illustrates these four steps with arrows showing the request/response flow between client and server.
```

> **Why this matters:** Even if some multimodal LLMs use vision encoders to process images, their understanding is heavily dependent on accompanying text. Rich alt text provides semantic hooks that allow the AI to connect visual information with textual concepts. Maybe think of it likek describing images to AI is like being a radio announcer describing a sports game. The audience can't see what's happening, so you need to paint the complete picture with words.

### 5. Be explicit about what you're referring to

Pronouns and vague references create ambiguity that AI systems struggle with. Being explicit reduces confusion.

**Ambiguous:**

```
Update the configuration file and restart the server. If it fails, check the logs.
```

**Explicit:**

```
Update the `config.yaml` file and restart the application server. If the application server fails to start, check the application server logs.
```

> > **Why this matters:** [Coreference resolution is challenging for LLMs](https://spotintelligence.com/2024/01/17/coreference-resolution-nlp/) when pronouns have unclear antecedents. Vague references like "it" force the AI to make probabilistic guesses about what entity is being referenced, often incorrectly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> **Why this matters:** [Coreference resolution is challenging for LLMs](https://spotintelligence.com/2024/01/17/coreference-resolution-nlp/). Vague references like "it" force the AI to make probabilistic guesses about what entity is being referenced, often incorrectly.
```

**Quick check:** Ask an AI tool about a key feature using your current terminology. If it responds with old feature names or outdated processes, you've got drift.

## Testing your documentation with LLMs and AI tools

The best way to know if your optimization efforts are working is to test them the same way your developers do: by asking AI tools directly.

Pick a few critical workflows (authentication, key endpoints, error handling) and test them with ChatGPT, Claude, or whatever AI tools your team uses. Ask questions like:

- "How do I authenticate with the Company API?"
- "Show me a curl example for the users endpoint"
- "What does a 403 error mean in this API?"

If the AI gives you accurate, complete answers, your structure is working. If it's confused, missing steps, or mixing up concepts, you've found areas that need improvement.

## The practical path forward

Here's a suggested path to implementing this without disrupting your entire documentation workflow:

- **Start with your highest-impact content.** Don't try to optimize everything at once. Focus on your authentication docs, key endpoints, and getting started guide. In other words, the context developers hit most often.

> - **Use your OpenAPI spec as the foundation.** If you're maintaining API documentation manually, you're making this harder than it needs to be. [Tools like Redocly can generate consistently structured documentation](https://redocly.com/) from your OpenAPI specification, automatically handling most of the formatting issues that confuse AI systems.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Use your OpenAPI description as the foundation.** If you're maintaining API documentation manually, you're making this harder than it needs to be. [Tools like Redocly can generate consistently structured documentation](https://redocly.com/) from your OpenAPI description, automatically handling most of the formatting issues that confuse AI systems.
```
